date: Jun 13 2010
categories: life

# Check-Ins That Matter

I realized this evening that my iPhone is devastating my ability to meet interesting people. I was having dinner by myself, munching on an omelet at a diner counter and madly catching up on my [Instapaper](http://www.instapaper.com) backlog. After about 20 minutes, I noticed my waiter just chilling in my vicinity behind the counter.

Ashamed of myself, I stashed the iPhone away (where it should have been the whole time) and chatted this guy up. And I really enjoyed the conversation. He was a Mexican guy, genuinely proud and happy to have worked his way up from bus boy to waiter... at both restaurants where he works! How's that for putting life into perspective?

I've yet to become a big Foursquare guy, but I'm going to restart the check-in game I used to play when my phone sucked: starting a conversation and making a friend whenever I fly solo.

## A Cool Travel Story About People

If you're still with me, you must understand the life-enriching awesomeness of meeting new people. I'm a travel junkie and think it's worth sharing a serendipitous moment I was a bystander to. Awesome stuff happens when you make new friends.

I spent a year of my college experience studying in Luxembourg. My classmates and I wound up the year sailing in Greece and most of us hit the airport to head home at the same time. While standing in line recapping memories with a buddy, he began telling me a story about a guy he met and hung out with in Munich. Homeboy was described as tall and skinny, dreads and never without a bongo drum. The amusing part of the story was that after hanging out in Munich, these two randomly bumped into each other in Madrid.

As these details were being recounted to me, my friend muttered, "Holy shit," and took off. I watched him run over to a tall skinny guy with dreads and a bongo drum. Unreal. They were hugging like long lost brothers. Warms my soul just thinking about it.

Get your face out of the phone because you never know who you'll meet.